[Music]
I'm Barry Rhaltz. You're listening to
Masters in Business on Bloomberg Radio.
My extra special guest this week is
Heather Boucher. She is a senior
research fellow at the Harvard Kennedy
School working on the Reimagining the
Economy Project. Previously, she
co-founded the Washington Center for
Equitable Growth in 2013. She has been
an economist for the Joint Economic
Committee of the US Congress and on the
Council of Economic Advisors for
President Biden. She became chief
economist to the president's invest in
America cabinet. Politico twice named
her one of the top 50 thinkers, doers,
and visionaries transforming American
politics. Her most recent book is
Unbound: How Economic Inequality
Constricts Our Economy and What We Can
Do About It. Heather Bucher, welcome to
Bloomberg.
>> Thank you. It's a real pleasure to be
here with you today.
>> It's a pleasure to have you here. Let
let's start a little bit with your your
background. BA in economics from
Hampshire College, then a PhD from the
New School. also in economics. What was
the original career plan?
>> Oo, well, I I actually wanted to be an
economist and run a think tank someday
and get to do things like this. Um I
grew up in the Pacific Northwest um in a
place called Muckle, Washington. My
>> Seattle near Seattle near Seattle. It's
north.
>> Um it's um right next to Everett,
Washington. My dad worked at the big
Everett Boeing plant um where when I was
a kid they made the 747s. When I was a
kid it was the largest landmass building
in the world has now been overtaken by
the Tesla Gigafactory.
Um and in the early 80s um you know I
lived in a community with a bunch of
culde-sacs all new houses that had
basically been built for the workers and
um you know for the families of Boeing.
Um, and in the early 80s, every kid at
my bus stop had one or two parents that
were pinklipped. They had been laid off.
Um, it was the early '8s, what I know
now to be the Vulcar recession. And at
the time, I was really just struck by
how much power this company had over my
life and the lives of my friends. And
um, you know, I was really good at math.
And over time I realized that economics
was the field that was supposed to have
answers to questions like how is it that
you know you can have that economic
security that I as a kid wanted um and
wanted for my family.
>> So formative years as a kid watching
what the company town uh how it
progressed when layoffs came. Is that
what led your focus to the intersection
of economic growth and inequality?
>> Probably. I think the the question that
I have asked my entire career is what
what creates that opportunity for
economic security for America's middle
class. How do you make America's middle
class grow and thrive and what stands in
the way? And so I've spent a lot of time
thinking about government policy,
thinking about, you know, how we can uh
encourage firms to create those good
middle- class jobs, what government
needs to do when those jobs aren't
available or when those jobs don't
provide child care or unemployment
benefits or whatever it is that families
need.
>> So it's such a partisan era these days.
when you were working um uh on the as an
economist for the joint economic
committee of US Congress, was it that
partisan or was there some cooperation?
Hey, we all have the same goals. We just
differ in our means of getting there.
What what was it what years were that
what was it like when you worked there?
>> So, I was there in 2008 um 2007 into
2008. And so it was, you know, the
financial crisis and there was not a lot
of partisan uh happiness, you know, in
that in those years uh on the Hill. I
will say over my career, I've testified
over three dozen times for Congress. And
the, you know, early on in my career, I
felt like people on both sides of the
aisle were much more polite, much more
um cognizant of the fact that, you know,
as someone who's a researcher and you
show up and you've you've spent all week
preparing this testimony and you're
ready to ask questions, but you're doing
this, you're volunteering your time.
You're not being subpoenenaed. You're
just there to share information. And
people on both sides of the aisle would
generally be respectful of that. And I
definitely have noted over time that uh
people on the other side of the aisle
now are are are less likely to be polite
to me when I'm testifying. I mean, I
haven't testified in a number of years,
but I I've seen that over my career. So,
that partisanship has really drilled
down into how we treat experts and
people who are volunteering, people who
are just sharing information. And that,
you know, is just one of the many
indications in our society of how
partisan it is.
>> So, a lot of us and them, a lot of
tribalism. Let let's talk about when you
were on the Council of Economic Advisors
in the last administration. What sort of
work did you do? What was that like?
>> Well, it was very exciting. Um, I joined
Joe Biden during his campaign. Um, in
March of 2020, I started advising him
and
>> strictly economic uh and policy
analysis. strictly economic and you know
what do we do about COVID and what do we
do about the economic recovery and how
do we think about the economic agenda. I
had um advised Hillary Clinton um as an
economic adviser. I was a chief
economist for her transition in 2016. So
I had some experience um in that role
when I started helping the Biden
campaign. But after he was elected um
you know he announced his econ team. It
was a second group of announced um hires
that he made and you know immediately
we were announced in early December and
the first question that we had to deal
with was what do we do about COVID? What
do we do about the recession? How do we
get people you know back to school and
work? How do we make sure everyone is
safe but can get the economy back on
track? And you know, the president had
said, you know, throughout the campaign
that he didn't want to just build back
from the pandemic, but that he wanted to
build back better and had this really
robust economic agenda. And so when we
started out at the Council of Economic
Adviserss, we were thinking a lot about,
well, will there be a new variant of the
virus? What will that mean for the
economy? How does that affect global
supply chains? How does school
reopenings affect, you know, labor
supply? So, a bunch of questions we're
thinking about there. And then we also
did a lot of work thinking about well
what does what do all these pieces of
build back better mean? How do we craft
a set of economic policies that can uh
support and grow America's middle class?
That's Joe Biden's northstar. It's what
he wanted his economic um agenda to
really focus on. How do we do that? How
do we um help people understand how all
the pieces of that agenda fit together?
So that's what that's a lot of what we
did and quite frankly a lot of what the
Council of Economic Advisors does is
help people understand the data. So
anytime there's an economic data
release, we were there writing a memo
for the president um you know getting on
television talking to the you know folks
on the radio and podcasters like this is
what those numbers mean. This is this is
how to explain the economy and and
what's going on around us.
>> So So we'll hold off on the current
administration
for a while. I I want to talk about
let's talk about CO for a minute. So,
here we are. We're recording this um at
the end of the summer in 2025.
You started mapping out a plan for CO
just about five years ago. Here we are.
It's 5 years later. Some things seem to
have worked out well, some things not as
much. We still see lots and lots of
people not returning to office. There
are a lot of people who have been
dislocated. The pandemic very much
revealed a lot of stress fractures in
society, but give yourself a grade. What
what did you do well um in the response
to the pandemic and where do you wish
policy had been more robust or more
successful?
>> What a great question. So, I think first
off, you have to remember that when Joe
Biden took office, um you know,
Americans didn't have access to the
vaccine yet. And so the very first thing
that we had to do was to get those shots
in arms. The vaccine was available. It
was ready to go, but had to make sure
that it was distributed and distributed
as quickly as possible and that people
got those two rounds of shots so that
you know we could get things you know
start to get people back in school and
work and all the different things. And
you also have to remember that what a
what a bizarre start to a presidency
>> for sure.
>> Like we were um remote, right? you had
all of these workers who, you know, were
telecommuting. You didn't have, you
didn't have any inauguration parties.
There were no, you know, you didn't have
any of the normal trappings of a new
administration. And you had all these
people coming in who um we had to do all
of that while also dealing with the
pandemic internally and then making sure
that the president and the senior
adviserss and the cabinet officials
themselves didn't get sick. So I, you
know, when I look back, those first few
months were so courageous and incredible
when, you know, I look at what my
colleagues across the administration did
to get those shots in arms, to get uh
schools reopened, to get um, you know,
uh, all the support that that folks
needed, and on top of that, to have
passed this really important historic
legislation, the American Rescue Plan,
that gave all of the support to
communities all across the country to
make sure that there were enough
resources to weather any future variants
that we could imagine over the, you
know, the next, you know, couple of
years.
>> I vividly recall getting my first shot
at the Javit Center in Manhattan.
>> Wow.
>> Which was crazy because it was set up
with military precision. I don't know if
it was the Army or the National Guard,
but there were literally military troops
just running it like it was a military
operation. Incredibly effective,
incredibly efficient. they must have
processed tens of thousands of people a
day. Um
that was like oh so someone's on top of
this. It felt like someone really had
been very proactive and had thought this
through
>> well and that is what that is what folks
were spending all of their time you know
initially let's let's make that happen
but then after that you still had all of
this recovery and I think if you think
back to before Biden took office you
know to 2020 when the pandemic was
happening and we were talking about what
it meant to shut the economy down and
there were some economists I always try
to be very careful in my language about
this that you know what kind of
recession we were having right. You
know, you saw, you know, at the
beginning of the pandemic, things shut
down, unemployment spikes, and it was
like, well, but unemployment was spiking
because we we needed people to take that
step back, right? And that's a different
kind of recession. And as you noted, it
uncovered all of these fragilityities.
You know, over the preceding decades, we
have allowed we have enabled private
actors to create these very complex
global supply chains really focused on
just in time production. Um, and not
building in resiliency or, you know,
duplicity, like having, you know,
multiple suppliers for a single good.
No, let's make sure that it's it's the
most efficient, but not thinking about
what happens when stuff goes wrong. And
you know, so our first couple years in
the White House were all about, oh,
there's another thing that doesn't work
anymore. There's another thing where
after the pandemic, businesses couldn't
just not get back up on their feet. And
so, a lot of the resources for the
American Rescue Plan were about h
helping small businesses, communities,
schools, all these different entities
get back up on their feet. And as we
were uncovering, and it really did feel
like a not a whack-a-mole because we
weren't whacking things down, but like
a, you know, a popup of all of these
different challenges that emerged. You
were realizing, I mean, I came I come
out of that experience
understanding how important it is to
have competent, dedicated public
servants who are getting up every day
saying that is a problem we need to
solve. That's one we maybe don't need to
solve, but these are things that can
affect American lives, American
communities, American health, safety,
the economy, and just how important that
leadership is. So, in terms of lessons
learned, I think the pandemic really
showed that um you need good governance
because in an emergency, that's what's
going to that is what's going to make
the difference. And so the military
precision of getting shots in arms that
you know thinking through all the
different pieces of the policy. I think
a lot about how we saved so many small
businesses in America particularly care
businesses child care centers um
long-term care facilities gave them an
infusion of funds to help them keep
going through the pandemic and that
meant that other people could then get
back to work. You talk about you know
people not necessarily all coming back
to office. We have seen that as a trend
in the labor market. For some families,
that may be really helpful for
addressing their care challenges. Um,
but one of the things that really helped
millions of people get back to work was
the federal government stepping in and
helping them deal with their care crisis
because their child care center wasn't
open and oh well, we can solve that
problem that helps that employee come
to, you know, Bloomberg every day. So,
those are those were really big. I think
um I because I know you you'll ask about
it next, so I just want to get to this.
Of course, you know, one of the
challenges was that that period led to
the highest inflation that we've seen in
the United States since the 1970s. You
know, inflation, anybody under the age
of 40 had never seen that kind of
inflation.
>> Before we get to inflation, cuz I I
think people don't understand, you
either had to choose high inflation or
or high persistent unemployment. And and
as unpleasant a choice that is,
I think most people would prefer high
inflation to not having a job. And so
that was the Sophie's choice that was
made. And by the way, it wasn't any one
thing. It was lots and lots of things,
including, you know, the biggest fiscal
stimulus since World War II under the
previous president, um, the first, uh,
President Trump term. But then there
were a lot of other factors including um
legislation on the Biden administration.
What I want to ask about is getting the
shots out that was that was a huge gain.
Making sure that a lot of the economy
began to reopen was important. But with
the benefit of hindsight, what do you
think were missed opportunities? What
what didn't get a high score? What
communication failures were there that
could have been handled better? Uh and
again a lot of this is 2020 hindsight.
>> It's a lot of I think that helping
people understand
the role that the fragility of supply
chains played in the challenges of
getting goods to um their local
supermarket or their local store that
was affecting inflation. I don't think
we did a good enough job helping people
understand
um all the things that the pandemic had
uncovered. Right? So, and I want to step
back just one because one thing that
always struck me at the beginning of the
pandemic and we were all like what is
this going to look like? And you know I
had heard of course about the flu, the
Spanish flu like sort of back in my
mind. I had never read anything about
you know what that had happened in you
know in the teens back in the 19s 1918
and um you know one thing though that I
had learned during the pandemic was that
that huge um pandemic had happened and
then it was like nobody wrote about it.
It you know this the Spanish flu was
like oh this thing this thing happened
and then it it just it was like people
wanted to forget it. And I feel that
there was a little bit as we were going
through the pandemic, people were so
traumatized that the idea that it was
uncovering how our economic system was
so fragile also got a little bit um I
feel like people kind of wanted to paper
over that and just move past it is we
just everyone wanted to get back to
normal without kind of wanting to stop
and say actually the way that we're
doing American business just isn't
working. And I think a lot about like
semiconductors for example. Um you know
I think we all learned a lot about
semiconductors during the pandemic
because all of a sudden we couldn't get
them right the global semiconductor um
shortage affected every you know all of
us right a factory closes in Malaysia or
in Taiwan and then all of a sudden you
can't buy something or prices are going
up. So that how we talk about that and
how we communicate that I think was
something that was really hard to do
amidst the health crisis. And so if I
were to, you know, kind of wave a magic
wand and go back in time, I I think I
would try to I would want to figure out
how we could spend more time helping
people understand those fragilities that
we were uncovering, which was hard
because people were so wrapped up in the
consequences of it, which was high
prices that they were seeing at the
store and which were being blamed on the
simplest explanation, which was
obviously government spent too much.
That kind of fits into our our everyday
narratives. when yet when you uncovered
it was like no actually it was because
of the fragility of these supply chains
and the decisions that all of these
businesses have been making for decades
and we need to hold them accountable. We
need to ask businesses to be more
resilient and that's going to require
rethinking our economy. That's a big
structural change that you know the
Biden administration really started to
push but how people understood that um
and did we do a good enough job talking
about that I I think that's something
that I wish we had done better. Let's do
talk about another communication issue
which is
the push back to vaccines. And I was
always kind of surprised by not just the
Trump administration but by Trump
himself who deserves a lot of credit for
Operation Warp Speed.
And yet of all the things he takes
credit for, he kind of let that slide.
Could we have communicated better that
hey we didn't just create these vaccines
overnight. This has been 10 years in the
making and it's safer especially for
people at risk over pick a number 50 60
70 uh than not having it. Uh I'm curious
as to your thoughts about communication
around that. There have been a lot of
push back about closing schools and as
it turns out kids are fairly safe
relative to CO. it doesn't seem to have
the same impact on them. Should we have
should we have left schools open? Should
we have tried different things
communicated? How do you how do you look
at those two areas?
>> Well, I think fundamental to those
questions are
we hadn't had a pandemic in a long time,
>> century,
>> right? We um we didn't know how bad it
would get. And you had this this we we
were in a moment where already um
America had become a lower trust
environment, right? People um had less
trust in government than they had, you
know, decades before, less trust in
business, less trust in experts. So,
you're already kind of walking into a
situation where you're trying to explain
to people what the health risk is. And
you you have to really um did we did did
everybody do a good enough job thinking
about what the trust how much trust the
listener was going to have from the
get-go. The problem is is that you don't
know how it's going to turn out. So you
want to make sure that you are um
protecting people to the best of your
ability, but you don't have all the
answers. And so, you know, but saying to
people, well, we suggest that you do
this, but maybe we don't know if that's
going to work. that doesn't go over very
well as a, you know, in a in a public
health crisis. So, I think part of um
part of the the the way that we've seen,
you know, the vaccines and the school
closures and all these things play out
is that that has further eroded the
trust that people have in the
institutions around them. even as we
know that it saved, you know, millions
of millions of lives and millions of
dollars in health care costs because
people didn't get sick and, you know,
all the rest for people to, you know, be
able to get the vaccine. And so
that was a was that a problem we could
have fixed amidst the pandemic or is
this something that we should be kind of
taking a step back and saying huh maybe
we should have been focusing um uh years
ago on why is it that that trust was
eroding and that leads to something that
I really want us to really focus on in
our conversation today is that really
toxic role that inequality has played in
our economy and our society which we
know is connected to this fail failure
of people to trust and particularly to
trust experts to to um to trust that
people are acting in their best
interest. So, Operation Warp Speed, this
incredible achievement of the Trump
administration, but yet pushed aside
because communities all of a sudden
became uh I mean, I I can't speak for
how those communities felt, but they
became fearful and distrustful. schools
closing and you you hear you still
continue to hear that debate on both
sides. Some people still frustrated that
their schools were open and some people
saying oh they closed for too long and
there's been health you know learning
not health losses but learning losses
among children. These are really
important questions and we should spend
time dissecting what we know now. But we
didn't know we didn't have all the
answers at the beginning.
>> Last question before we get to wealth
and income inequality. Um, how did in
total the United States do relative to
other modern democracies? How well do we
do compared to other countries?
>> Well, I'll focus on the stats that when
you ask that question, I can see clearly
clear list in my head. Um, so I can see
a couple of charts. So, number one, um,
you know, we early on had very high
death rates um, relative to other
countries, you know, as a proportion of
our population. So we um uh we were able
to to turn that around.
When you look at the economic data, the
United States um had one of the
strongest economic recoveries coming
had, you know, coming out of the
pandemic relative to our economic
competitors in the other advanced
economies on virtually any metric. So
yes, the United States saw high prices.
We saw inflation go up but um the prices
didn't go up as high as they did in some
other um advanced economies and then our
prices started coming down and um you
know look quite good. We saw stronger
economic growth. We've seen stronger
employment. So when you look at our
ability to take this health crisis to um
uh be able to get it under control
enough so that people could get back to
work, so businesses could get back up on
their feet, so the kids could get back
up in, you know, back to school and then
have your economy um uh get back on
track. I mean, even The Economist, and I
I can't remember exactly what the cover
was, the exact words were, but um it was
one of those, you know, like, wow, even
The Economist has said, you know, we
really knocked it out of the park in
terms of the economic performance of the
United States coming out of what could
have been um a very deep and um long
recession, kind of like what we saw
after the global financial crisis. Um
and you know we
>> difference being huge amount of fiscal
stimulus versus almost no fiscal
>> well and operation warp speed and
getting shots in arms and all the things
that we did to contain the pandemic.
>> So So you talk about the mortality rate
and I've seen other people point to a
lower vaccination rate. I'm curious if
uh some of the European criticism of the
United States response was um and I've
heard some of this from other corners of
of uh various partisan arguments
lot of pre-existing conditions. The
United States entered the pandemic with
not an especially healthy population. H
how much truth is in that claim?
Well, I'm not a health expert, but
certainly we know that the United States
population, you know, does have higher
uh death rates from a lot of, you know,
preventable
>> diabetes, obesity, all this, heart
disease.
>> So certainly that it doesn't surprise me
that people are saying that um about you
know how we entered the pandemic. And
then we know of course that you know
some of the after effects of you know
long co and you know how that affects
people particularly around some of these
um health issues is is important.
>> Huh. So if we look at the 2010s the
postfinancial crisis era not a lot of
fiscal stimulus almost all monetary
policy quantitative easing zero interest
rate policy rates were super low
inflation was under 2%. We look at the
post pandemic era, the 2020s, they've
been pretty much all fiscally driven. We
had CARES Act one and two under
President Trump, CARES Act three under
President Biden, the infrastructure
bill, the semiconductor bill, the Build
Back Better bill, the the most recent
big beautiful bill and all the tax cuts
there. the 2020s really feels like it's
uh fiscally driven whereas the previous
I don't know 15 20 years was all
monetary. What does that do to the issue
uh of wealth and income inequality in
the entire 2010s and 2020s?
Stocks, bonds, real estate, businesses
all seem to have done pretty well.
Doesn't matter if it's monetary or
fiscal. uh uh if you own if you own
capital based assets any sort of
stimulus seems to work.
>> Well, it's a really interesting
question. I think it to my mind the
answer goes back a little bit to
something I said earlier about the
importance of having uh good leadership.
Fiscal policy requires that you actually
have people that are thinking about what
is it that you want government to do?
What is government spending money on?
How are we thinking about uh setting
rules of the road for businesses so that
they are encouraged to behave in ways
that's going to benefit communities not
strip them of of their value or you know
create bad jobs or you know create
negative implications for the
environment. And monetary policy on the
other hand is very hands-off. It's you
know we set the interest rate there.
There is financial regulation of course
um and that's a big piece of it. bit
often when we're talking about um
addressing the business cycle it is
about the you know the interest rate
policy and I think what you've seen
especially post global financial crisis
has been a sense that that hands-off
policy and again I would kind of put
that a little bit in my brain that goes
into the trickle down mentality that
markets we're we're kind of going to
take our hands off because we believe
that markets are perfect so if we get
out of the way then everything will just
work out hunky dory and that hasn't that
hasn't worked out it certainly did not
work out in the recovery post global
financial crisis which you know left
Americans languishing in high
unemployment you know massive labor
market scarring for so many young people
that never really found that good start
um you know the the loss of wealth um
for millions of Americans and it that
took so long for us to to work work its
way through the system. The fiscal
policy option allows policymakers to
step in and be more active and to say
actually this is what we this is the
direction we need to go. So the
bipartisan infrastructure law that you
know invested money in communities in
every part of America in creating roads
and bridges that standard infrastructure
but also you know taking steps to bring
broadband to every family taking steps
to um make sure that schools that wanted
to put in electric school buses to
reduce the pollution and the noise for
kids riding that school bus every day
that they had resources to do that. So
infrastructure as we traditionally
thought about it and you know these new
um forms of in infrastructure that are
really important. Government really
stepping in and saying hey there are
certain sectors that we need as a
country to be investing in. High
technology um like semiconductors, clean
energy that these are the industries of
the future that we want America to be
and we need American businesses to be
competitive in. That was why we were
making those investments and we believe
that if we encourage businesses in the
right way that can create good jobs and
economic security for communities all
across the country. So that active
policy that is saying here's what really
matters to us as a as a society. um I
think is a part of this trend because we
can all see with our own eyes that 50
years of saying we'll let markets take
it you know that we don't really need to
intervene has left too many main streets
devastated has left too many families
without economic security and hasn't
delivered the kind of economy that
Americans want need and deserve. So
let's talk a little bit about wealth and
income inequality. And the first
question is what is the impact of this
on sustainable growth? Does wealth and
income inequality create a drag to
faster more widespread growth? That is
such a fantastic question and um I I
feel like it's a little bit of a leading
question because uh as you know I wrote
a book on how economic inequality
constricts our economy and what we can
do about it and uh a number of the
scholars that I've looked to over time
actually just got the Nobel Prize last
year in 2024 Dana Simoglu and Simon
Johnson and uh James Robinson for their
work looking at how institutions affect
long-term growth and I Start there
because part of what economic inequality
does, part of what wealth concentration
does is it destroys the institutions
that foster broadly shared growth.
>> Explain what you mean by that because
you know we've had wealth inequality
during the guilded age. We have uh
certainly in the 90s, 2000s and beyond
increasing wealth inequality primarily
due to to publicly traded uh equity and
a lot of concentrated ownership. How
does that destroy institutions? Well,
think of it this way. So, one of the
things that the United States was an
early leader in was making sure that uh
kids had access to free public
education. Um something that US
communities started to do early on. They
used um they raised taxes to do this.
And you know, we were a global leader in
the the early primary school movement.
And that's a really important uh
foundational institution for economic
growth because we know that talent and
entrepreneurship and skill not you know
skills can be learned but um all of
these things are they're they're
normally distributed they they affect a
they're distributed across a population
right it isn't just rich children who
have access to the best schools that
have the best ideas or are the most
talented in in everything right and so
if you have a society
where you are are making sure that
children um across different income
groups, across different racial groups,
you know, both girls and boys have
access to learning and and skill
building. Then your society is going to
benefit from them being able to find the
right fit as they go through life.
They're going to find the right role.
Oh, I'm really good at this or I'm
really good at that. They'll have those
opportunities and our economy, our
society will benefit from that, those
productivity gains. very famous economic
study by Raj Cheddy and his colleagues
many years ago now, but they um had data
on third graders here in New York City.
And um they were able to match this data
on the third graders and their test
scores on math and and English, but
we're just going to focus on math. and
they were able to then match those third
graders to their parents' income and to
their future income and whether or not
they ever applied for a patent. That's
just one measure of like it's not the
it's not the end all bit, but just one
measure of some kind of, you know,
success in the world.
>> And what they found was that the
children who did the best in third grade
on these standardized math um tests, uh
those kids were more likely to grow up
and get a patent. Totally makes sense.
But when you looked at those children by
the income group that their parents were
in, by their race, by their gender, you
saw something very strange happen. when
you just looked at the top kids in terms
of the math scores. So, this group that
was most likely to go on and get a
patent, um the children in that group
who came from the richest families who
were boys or were white were far more
likely than the children from lower
income families than girls or were um
black children to grow up and get a
patent. So what that tells you is that
our economy, our society has been denied
all of this these new ideas, these new
things we could be buying or new ways
that our our world could be changing
because those children who were highly
talented didn't have that opportunity
across their life. So what helps a a
low-income child get that education that
gives them that opportunity? Well, it is
it's having a good public school system
and good public universities and that
are affordable that give that kid an
opportunity. having um equal opportunity
laws that allow, you know, girls and
people of color to have those
opportunities that hinges on having
institutions that are fair and that are
enforcing anti-discrimination laws. Um
and so that is just one that's just one
pathway through which um inequality or
um you know, equity or lack thereof
affects our our potential for economic
growth, affects the kind of growth that
we have. I want to I want to push back
on that slightly in that
>> so is this an inequality issue or is
this a hey we have pretty mediocre
public schools especially in cities and
that leads to
exaggerating or amplifying the some
inequalities that are already in
existence like is this a tax issue is
this a competency and expertise issue
like Why are suburban schools in wealthy
suburbs
so much better reputations and higher
acceptance rates at IVs and all the
other usual measures of success? Is it
strictly money or is it some of it was
just a flight of experts to to higher
pay? I guess which comes back to money.
H how do we explain hey the kids are in
school they're just not really learning
a whole lot? Well, I I mean there's so
many there's so many directions we could
take that question. The
whether or not you are funding those
public institutions that enable a wide
range of people to have access to
opportunity. That's that's sort of the
first part of that answer, right? Are
they properly resourced? Well, the
answer, of course, we know is that they
haven't been. And there's there's a lot
of things happening, but two that are
really fundamental. Number one, in the
United States, public schools are
primarily financed by local property
taxes, which is inherently unequal,
right? That means that people that are
living communities with wealthier homes
have higher tax bases, and so those
those school districts have more
resources, which is exactly the opposite
of what you should be doing to, you
know, create more equity, more
opportunity. Isn't there a chicken and
egg situation there in that like I'm
just thinking of all the bedroom
communities 30 minutes outside of
Manhattan. They became
uh destination suburbia
because
hey it was it was quieter, it was
cleaner, it was neater and as it became
more and more um desirable the schools
started doing better. like
you you've create we've created a
situation where of course these wealthy
suburban school districts are going to
do better. That's why people pay higher
home prices and higher taxes in those
districts because they want a higher
quality public school. H how do you how
do you um deal with underfunded urban
schools when people are voting with
their feet and their tax dollars? Well,
I mean, so the the obvious answer is we
should be thinking about how we are
financing public schools, right? Should
we be should it all be about local I
mean, this is and this is a local issue.
Obviously, it's different in different
places. That's that is an answer. But
when you then zoom up to the federal
level and you think about the question
of whether or not we are properly
resourcing the institutions that we
need, the answer is of course we've seen
a half century now of primarily
Republicans selling the American people
on the idea that if we lower taxes,
particularly on the rich, that's going
to benefit them and their communities.
And of course, that's not what we've
seen. Trickle down economics hasn't
worked. Um it hasn't delivered stronger
growth overall. And what it's done is
starved our government of the resources
that it needs to then address some of
these inequities, you know, at the
federal level or, you know, um um or,
you know, potentially at the state level
depending on
>> ultimately a tax question of
>> and it's a a question though of why have
we decided to starve government in order
to give money back to the richest in our
society. So you can see, you know, time
and again these massive tax packages.
The the most egregious of course being
the one that passed this year that
Donald Trump signed.
>> Is this one really more egregious than
the 2017 tax and jobs act?
>> It is difficult
>> because I hear the exact same complaints
and it's you know what is it? It's uh
eight years later. It is.
There is no justification for the kinds
of tax cuts that we've just given to the
richest people in our society while
gutting Medicaid, denying families and
children and and new parents access to
health care, which will make it that
much harder for our society to thrive.
You know, for decades to come, people
are going to be sicker. They're not
going to have access to healthcare.
They're going to go into bankruptcy. all
of the hospitals are going to close. So
the the damage that we are doing to
communities because of that tax
legislation is truly phenomenally.
>> So let let's explore that a minute
because you talked about trickle down
and I I think that's so long ago. I
don't know if people voted for that. Um
the thing that's been
>> Well, he did he did say I mean let's be
clear, President Trump did tell people
during his campaign that he would not
cut Medicaid. That's true. So, he did
tell people he would raise tariffs, but
he did not. He said he would not cut
Medicaid, and he did that. That was one
of the first things that he did.
>> Here's the thing that that is the big
surprise to me is that we're seeing the
impact of the tax package
falling in a surprising way on a lot of
red states, farmers, rural communities.
There have been number of stories about
rural hospitals are closing left and
right. There are going to be people that
are going to have to drive three, four,
five hours if to have a baby delivered.
And if there's a heart attack, I got
some bad news. You You ain't going to
make that.
>> Well, the baby may not make it either. I
mean, to the hospital.
>> To the hospital, for sure. So So the
question is,
and I don't have an answer for this. Are
are people just voting tribally? they're
voting for what their party affiliation
is because it doesn't seem like a lot of
people realize um and this true on both
sides of the aisle, but it's especially
true um uh given what we've seen in in
some of the redder parts of the country
and I I I keep coming back to all these
rural hospitals closing. Uh are people
just not voting in their own interest?
Are there other factors driving this?
And I know you're not a political
economist and that's not your focus,
>> but I I think that people is my personal
view that people are voting for somebody
that they believe is on their side.
>> And when you take the long view and you
look at the US economy, what you see is
a half century of rising economic
inequality. the top pulling further and
further apart from the rest. The middle
class being squeezed harder to go from
being low income into that secure
economic middle, a rise in economic
concentration. And by that meaning in,
you know, across industries in the
United States, there are fewer and fewer
businesses. You talk of hospitals,
there's been massive consolidation in
the hospital sector, right? So in many
communities already there might have
been a number of hospitals but they're
all owned by the same company right
which creates um lower wages for the
workers the nurses and the doctors that
work and the janitors that work at those
hospitals creates that what what we as
economists we call monopsiny labor
market um and we know that uh they're
they're less likely to be resilient in
in situations like this. So, these are
longstanding,
brewing crises that this most recent
legislation has then just sort of lit
the match under and said, "We're not,
well, we're not going to we're not going
to give those communities the money they
need for these hospitals." But it is on
top of this rising economic inequality
that I think has made so many people
unclear of who's on their side. And for
some reason, they believed that Trump
was. He goes out there and he says he's
on your side, but his actions really
haven't been. And I think that's what's
so hard and frustrating to watch. But I
think the truth of that, the truth in
there that we need to be very thoughtful
about is if you want people to vote for
you, if you want people to vote for
people that that are actually going to
support and grow America's middle class,
how are we showing that? How are we
demonstrating that actually our goal
isn't just more elites making more
money, but is actually making sure that
communities thrive, that there are good
jobs, that there is um the kinds of um
institution, you know, good schools and
health care and all the things that
communities need. Are we actually
delivering that?
>> So, we've been talking about how the
past 40 or 50 years uh has seen both
wealth inequality expand and income
inequality. Uh uh so much dates back to
the 80s and 90s which
younger folks may not really remember. I
want to I want to start by asking you um
about unintended consequences. And I I
have uh a recollection of legislation
passed under the Clinton administration
that said, "Hey, you can't pay your CEOs
tens of millions of dollars. It just
seems ridiculous. Instead, we're going
to cap the pay and allow you to pay them
in stock and stock options. And as the
stock market has gone higher and higher
over the past, you know, 30 years, it
seems like a well-intentioned attempt to
reduce wealth inequality helped create
more. H how can we respond to those
sorts of things when um it seems the
private sector is clever enough to kind
of figure its way around whatever
legislative challenges uh are are put in
their their way.
>> Always vigilant. Right.
>> Right.
>> I I mean I think that it starts by
I mean it starts with taxation. Right.
So
what we have done over decades is lower
tax rates at the top. We've made it
>> for corporate corporations or for
individuals because both
>> corporations as a percentage of total
tax paid and the actual corporate tax
rate they both seem to have drifted down
over the past few decades.
>> All of the above. Um and we've done that
while not doing the things that we need
to do to fix um uh the the transfer of
wealth across generations. So we haven't
imposed the kinds of inheritant taxes
that I think would be really important
to to make sure that that wealth isn't
calcified uh over time in families. Um
and and that has been um that is that
has really made it so much easier for
those who were who you know worked
really hard, did good, um not having to
give back through, you know, not having
to pay those taxes on their their
highest income. But it also has allowed
wealth to calcify. You know, there's
this really important book that came out
a number of years ago that I feel like
we don't talk about anymore by um Thomas
on called Capital in the 21st
century.
>> And there were
>> huge that book was headlines for weeks.
>> It was for weeks for weeks. Um and uh
you know, one of the things that that
really was so important about that book
was the way that he showed through all
of this data, the way that income, high
income inequality equality calcifies
into high wealth inequality. And that
once wealth becomes um congealed right
once a smaller and smaller number of
people have access to that it becomes
very difficult to unpack that to share
that and for society as a whole to
benefit from it.
>> So let me push back a little bit and say
hey we have 50% estate tax. Um and the
way you could get around that is by
donating it to a philanthropy, a
foundation, what have you. Yeah, there
are various trusts and things you can
set up to avoid paying some of the
taxes, but the tax man gets his due
eventually.
We're not like the UK that has this
esconceed gentrified
nobility. Still, the the upper class
there is, you know, just generations of
uh land ownersh
are or isn't the United States different
from other countries or So we have
landed gentry here the way the UK does.
I would argue I mean so first off on the
data we have so much higher economic
inequality than our European um other
European countries and we don't see the
kind of movement across income groups
that
>> we used to we used to have pretty good
postw World War II economic mobility was
pretty high in the United States
>> right so if you were born in the 1940s
your your chance of out earning your
parents was about 90%.
>> Right. But if you're born in the 1980s,
yeah, only one in two of us
>> has grown up to out earn um their
parents. So that's that is a remarkable
shift, a remarkable constraint on upward
mobility over time. And it is because
you've seen this high these high incomes
calcify into wealth inequality that's
sticky. Right? You talked we talked
earlier about people moving into, you
know, wealthier con um enclaves, you
know, with, you know, better schools.
Well, that is a way of um you know, it's
one way that it works its way through
society that those kids will have more
opportunities. It you you you are able
to keep that wealth in in that family um
and then you don't see those economic
benefits kind of flowing throughout your
society and and you don't see that
economic opportunity flowing through.
So, we talked a little bit about um uh
what the pandemic revealed with fragile
supply chains and how uh many crucial
things like just um the masks and gowns
and gloves that aren't made in the
United States. Um what what's the
genesis of this? How how much of this
can we blame on Walmart and how much of
this can we blame on just hey uh
technology and transportation allowed
manufacturing to go to the lowest cost
provider?
That's a big question with a lot of
answers, but I think there's a few
really important points there, right? So
once you had the capacity for an idea to
happen in one place, the innovation, the
engineers, the um the plans happen in
one place and the production of
something to happen someplace else
because you know you could send those
plans via the internet or you know to a
different place.
It made it possible for us for for
companies all across the United States,
around the world to outsource that
production. And we did that at a time
when we were making those rules easier,
right? We had um uh decades of trade
agreements that made it easier for firms
to um have overseas production to become
multinational companies. We wanted to
trade. We wanted to have more trade. We
believe that would make it safer. It
would, you know, you're not gonna go to
war with somebody if you're trading with
them, right? you're you're going to
create these these positive u benefits
for our geopolitics.
And yet what we've seen is that what
that's done is it's really stripped
production from the ideas and the
innovation and sort of left the United
States with kind of assuming that we
could be the ideas people, but that the
the production of things could happen in
places where wages were lower and where
we didn't have to worry about messy
things like the environmental
consequences. So you took the hard stuff
out of all the things that we make and
use and yet you outsource that and
that's left our economy very fragile
because as it turns out when things get
rough when there's a pandemic and you
know I'm spending a lot of time these
days thinking about well one of the the
the the crises coming down the down the
pipeline at us is climate change and the
energy transition that that will
require. that's going to create these
ongoing challenges for our economies and
our societies if you have this global
production.
Where's the resiliency? What is that
going to do? Are you going to be are we
literally going to be safe as a nation?
Let alone the economic consequences that
we've seen for decades. It's that that
kind of global production system has
hollowed out American communities. And
I'm not saying that it was caused by
policy, but it was facilitated. There
was this very important role for
technology. But we didn't step in and
sort of say not enough policy makers
stepped in and said, "Hey, this might
not be this might not be good for us. We
may want to make sure that we have the
capacity to make the most important
things because if you can't make them,
then you're going to be vulnerable in a
geopolitical sense." And now we're kind
of quite frankly stuck behind the
eightball a little bit where some of the
most important things we don't have the
capacity to make. And again, we saw that
in the pandemic with the simple things
with the masks. We also saw that with
the ventilators where we couldn't get
enough of those and we saw that um
another example that I've thought a lot
about recently I um talked to a lot of
people when I was in Cambridge this year
uh drones which you know the the all of
you know virtually all of those are made
in China. So when China started
partnering with Russia that made it hard
for the Ukrainians to get the drone
parts and to get the drones they need to
fight their war. That's a that that was
a technology problem that very quickly
became a very important national
security issue and are we are we getting
ahead of those kinds of questions.
>> So uh Nasim Taleb wrote a book called
antifragile
all about resiliency and how to make
sure that you're you're not merely
relying on just one element that you're
diversified and broadly exposed.
How can government policy
drive that? I I if if it's in the
shareholders interest to reduce costs a
maximum amount, increase profits maximum
amount, who's responsible for creating
this anti-fragility?
Uh how does government build resilience
into the economy?
>> Well, there's it's a tough question, but
there are some tools. I mean, so first
off, you have to define it. And what do
you mean by resiliency is that you want
to have uh domestic production
production with you know in the during
the Biden years we called it friend
shoring or you know production within
allies that you feel really comfortable
with but fundamentally it comes down to
do you have various options if there's a
if if something happens with this part
of your supply chain are there other
ways that you can get what you need we
live in a continent spanning economy and
you know with you know 330 340 million
people. There is a lot of opportunity to
create resiliency domestically, but we
also there's a lot of benefits to global
trade. So, how do we think about making
rules that encourage that? And the thing
in the nut of this is is that that's
going to be a little bit costlier in the
short term, but what are the costs over
the long term? What are the costs during
a crisis? How much money did the federal
government had to spend during the
pandemic to help companies get over
their supply chain challenges? How much
extra money did Americans pay because
firms were able to charge higher prices
than even perhaps they needed to because
of the crisis? So there are and and and
we know that there will be future crisis
coming. So it's government's job to make
sure that we're you know protecting the
welfare of the nation. This certainly
needs to be a part of the question. So
what are all the tools in our toolbox?
So maybe some of those tools are about
how we think about um our trade policy,
how we think about our antitrust policy,
maybe we're using procurement policy,
but there's a a wider range of tools
that government should be using. So it I
wouldn't get too wrapped up in the one
solution, but that this is the question
that we need to be asking ourselves. So
I was fascinated by some research you
did. Uh at at the time there was this
concept that highly educated women were
dropping out of the labor force because
of the motherhood movement. I think the
news media picked that up and ran with
it. Turns out the data really didn't
support it. Tell us about your research
into um what was going on with uh the
she session that that people had been
talking about. Well, this comes up time
and again where you see and it's
happening now actually and it happened
in the in in the uh early 2000s that
you'll see these moments where women uh
their labor supply goes down or they
don't recover from a recession and
people start saying, "Oh, well, it's
definitely because she because women
don't want to be in the labor market.
They'd prefer to not be working and so
this is good or this is, you know,
women's preferences." And then when you
start scratching the surface and you
look at the data um you see that
actually uh it's it tends to be more
about demand side issues that those jobs
weren't available or they weren't
providing the the supports uh that
families need to deal with care issues.
So that was the research that I did on
opting out in the early 2000s. And I've
been hearing a lot about this more
recently with um you know what's
happened post pandemic and is a lot of
businesses are demanding return to
office but with um the pairing back of
the American Rescue Plan and the
inability of the Biden administration to
get all of the care pieces of our agenda
across the finish line. You know,
Senator Mansion stopped the investments
in long in home health care for the
aged. He stopped those investments that
we wanted to do for child care. So, a
lot of those businesses have really
struggled uh in in the past couple of
years. You're now seeing that have an
effect on women's labor force
participation. And people are again
talking about this is voluntary when I
think we need to really be looking what
kinds of supports are we making sure
that families can address their care
issues and still participate in the
labor market.
>> Thank you, Heather, for being so
generous with your time. We have been
speaking with Heather Bucher, senior
research fellow at the Harvard Kennedy
School and her most recent book,
Unbound: How How Economic Inequality
Constricts Our Economy and What We Can
Do About That. If you enjoy this
conversation, well, be sure and check
out any of the previous 550 we've done
over the past 11 years. You can find
those at iTunes, Spotify, Bloomberg,
YouTube, or wherever you find your
favorite podcast. Check out my new book,
How Not to Invest: The Ideas, Numbers,
and Behavior That Destroy Wealth and How
to Avoid Them. How Not to Invest at Your
Favorite Bookstore. I would be remiss if
I did not thank our crack team that
helps put these conversations together
each week. Alexis Noriega and Anna Luke
are my producers. Uh Sean Russo is my
researcher. Justin Milner is my audio
engineer. Sage Bowman is the head of
podcast at Bloomberg. I'm Barry Ritoltz.
You're listening to Masters in Business
on Bloomberg Radio.
[Music]